# Exploring Scitree

## Settings

* To facilitate some examples we will use the explorer which is a fantastic library to work with datasets ([See the documentation to configure](https://github.com/elixir-nx/explorer)).

* Scitree is a wrapper over the [yggdrasil](https://github.com/google/yggdrasil-decision-forests) library and has several decision tree algorithms, with which we can perform training in an optimized way.

```elixir
Mix.install([
  {:explorer, "~> 0.1.0-dev", github: "elixir-nx/explorer", branch: "main"},
  {:scitree, "~> 0.1.0", github: "jeantux/scitree", branch: "main"}
])
```

### Wine Data Set

For our examples we will use the [Wine Data Set](https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Wine) and then convert this dataset to map in a format accepted by Scitree.

The first is the `dataset_train` which will be used to train our model and the second is the `dataset_predict` which will be used in our predictions.

For the predictions, 10 samples were randomly selected.

```elixir
dataset_train =
  Explorer.Datasets.wine()
  |> Explorer.DataFrame.to_map()

dataset_predict =
  Explorer.Datasets.wine()
  |> Explorer.DataFrame.sample(10)
  |> Explorer.DataFrame.to_map()
```

To generate a training, the scitree needs to receive a configuration with guidelines on how the training should be done, more details on configuration options can be found in the `Scitree.Config` module.

Then we pass the settings and our training dataset to `train/2` which returns a status and a reference to the generated model.

```elixir
ref =
  Scitree.Config.init()
  |> Scitree.Config.label("class")
  |> Scitree.Config.learner(:random_forest)
  |> Scitree.Config.task(:classification)
  |> Scitree.train(dataset_train)
```

A data specification is a list of attribute definitions that indicates how a dataset is semantically understood.

Check the documentation of the `inspect_dataspec/1` function for more details

```elixir
Scitree.inspect_dataspec(ref)
```

To perform the prediction, just call the function `predict/1`, passing the reference of our model and the desired dataset.
The function must return a status and a list of predictions.

The class column was removed from our dataset because the idea was to simulate a structure without the column with the results.
However, if the column with the result is present, internally this removal operation will be performed.

```elixir
predictions = Scitree.predict(ref, dataset_predict |> Map.delete(:class))
```

If you wish to calculate metrics with the results, you can use [scholar](https://github.com/elixir-nx/scholar) to do it.

This library is including inside the scitree and you can see the options using the documentation.

```elixir
import IEx.Helpers

h(Scholar.Metrics)
```

For the calculations it is necessary to work with the data in the form of [Nx tensors](https://github.com/elixir-nx/nx).

To convert the probabilities predictions to class you can use `probabilities_to_class`,
the index of the first element start with one because zero is reserved to out of dictionar

The result is in tersor format.

```elixir
Scitree.Predictions.probabilities_to_class(predictions)
```
